README.md, before:

monkey.tmbundle
===============

This bundle lets you to use the Mac OS X editors [TextMate](http://macromates.com) or [Textastic](http://www.textasticapp.com), as well as Windows editor [E Text Editor](http://www.e-texteditor.com), as an IDE for the [monkey programming language](http://www.monkeycoder.co.nz). It is based in part on the existing [blitzmax.bundle](https://github.com/nilium/blitzmax.tmbundle) so thanks to Nilium for that.

Created by Matt Sephton, [http://www.gingerbeardman.com/monkey/](http://www.gingerbeardman.com/monkey/)

## Download

https://github.com/gingerbeardman/monkey.tmbundle/archive/master.zip

## Features

**Syntax Highlighting**  
Easily see keywords, constants, strings, comments, numbers and functions/classes/methods in your code

**Auto Completion of Keywords**  
Press the Escape key to cycle through all matches after typing part of a keyword, Shift+Escape will take cycle backwards, Option+Escape will present a list of matches for you to choose from

**Expand Keywords into Code**  
Press the Tab key to expand one keyword into one or more lines of code, subsequent presses of tab intelligently jump you through the resulting code allowing you to fill in multiple parameters with minimal key strokes

**Build options**  
Specify target, config and run options in the source - no need for the command line

**Build/Run hotkeys**  
Quick and easy full build by pressing ⌘B, or a quicker update and run using ⌘R

**Jump to Error**  
Automatically jump to error after update and run, or with a click after full build

**Context Sensitive Help**  
View the monkey module docs in a popup window by pressing F13

**Quick Start Template**  
One click skeleton template to get you started, build to see instant results

**Easy Source Navigation**  
Navigate around your source using the index of functions, classes and methods

**Bundle Update Check**  
Easily see if you're using the most recent version of the bundle

**Code Folding**, **Configurable Shortcut Keys**  
...and more!

## Installation

* Unzip download if it has not been automatically unzipped.

* Rename folder `monkey.tmbundle-master` to `monkey.tmbundle`.

* Double click, or manually move the bundle to:

	TextMate 2:  
	`/Users/username/Library/Application Support/Avian/Bundles/monkey.tmbundle`

	TextMate 1.5:  
	`/Users/username/Library/Application Support/TextMate/Bundles/monkey.tmbundle`

## Usage

### Setup

Before you can use the _monkey_ bundle, you must first set the `TM_MONKEY` shell variable.

To do this, open TextMate's preferences (⌘,) and navigate to the _Advanced_ pane.  Select the _Shell Variables_ tab and add the `TM_MONKEY` variable, where its value is the location of your _monkey_ installation.  For example, "/Developer/Applications/monkey".  Do not include a trailing slash in the path.

This variable allows you to build your applications (⌘B). Documentation and trans lookups are relative to this location.

### Using Projects

When using projects, you can set the `TM_MONKEY_MAIN_FILE` shell variable for your project and specify the main _monkey_ file to build when you use the Build App (⌘B) command.

To set this variable, open the project drawer and deselect any files, then click the "i" button at the bottom of the drawer to open the project info.  Add the `TM_MONKEY_MAIN_FILE` variable, and set its value to the file relative to the main file project's directory.

### Build Options

When using the Build App and Run App commands, your main source file (either the file you have open or the one specified by `TM_MONKEY_MAIN_FILE`) is quickly scanned for a set of build options to determine how to build and/or run the results.  These build options are available under the Build Options snippets, and are as follows:

- **Release & Debug** - `debug`, `release`  
Specifies whether or not to compile the program in debug mode.
- **Target** - `Html5_Game`, `Flash_Game`, `Xna_Game`, `Android_Game`, `iOS_Game`, `Glfw_Game`, `C++_Tool`  
Specifies what type of target to produce. Only targets that are installed correctly on your machine will be available.
- **Run After Build** - `run`  
Executes the resulting output immediately after building it.

Build options are formatted as comments inside your source code and do not have any meaning outside of this bundle.  They are written as:

   `' buildopt: option`

where 'option' is the option you're enabling for the Build and Run commands.  The comments must be on their own lines with only whitespace preceding  them.

## Windows

Use of the bundle under Windows using the [E Text Editor](http://www.e-texteditor.com/) is possible. I'll happily include any hints and tips here if you have them. Otherwise, please consult the [E forum](http://www.e-texteditor.com/forum/viewforum.php?f=6).

## Support
You can talk about the bundle on the [official monkey forum](http://www.monkeycoder.co.nz/Community/posts.php?topic=69)

## Requirements
- TextMate [http://macromates.com](http://macromates.com)
- monkey [http://www.monkeycoder.co.nz](http://www.monkeycoder.co.nz)

## License
monkey.tmbundle is made available under a [Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0).

## Changelog

**2013-05-20**  
- Corrected version checking (issue 3)  
- Moved Drawpoint to Declarations (issue 4)  
- Renamed and relinked "download bundle" menu item  
The following are courtesy of https://github.com/tluyben:  
- Updated Build & Run and relevant snippets to v70  
- Documentation target update (issue 5)  
- Fixed the doc viewer and reworked the build option snippets so they work with the new targets  

**2012-05-04**  
- Added Set, FloatSet, IntSet, StringSet (v54c)  
- Added DrawPoint (v50)
- Improved DrawPoly support  
- Included Shinkiro1's new View Documentation for current keyword (v53 and newer)  
- Added new View Documentation (v53 and newer)  

**2011-10-20**  
- Fixed the Update & Run (⌘R) command. Now displays tooltip rather than opening a blank document  
- Renamed bundle update menu items for clarity  

**2011-10-08**  
- Added "Check for bundle update" and  "Open bundle page on github" commands  
- Added FirstNode, LastNode, NextNode, PrevNode, Exp (v45c)  
- Added DisableKeyboard, EnableKeyboard (v45)  
- Added ACosr, ASinr, ATan2r, ATanr, Cosr, Sinr, Tanr (v44)  
- Added DrawPoly (v43)  
- Added App: UpdateRate  
- Added Audio: music commands (v35), Discard  
- Added Graphics: DeviceHeight, DeviceWidth, Frames, HandleX, HandleY, Height, Width  
- Added Lang: Print, Length, Resize, Compare, ToLower, ToUpper, Trim  
- Added List: Backwards, Clear, Count, First, IsEmpty, Last, LastNode, ObjectEnumerator, RemoveFirst, RemoveLast, Value, ToArray  
- Added Map: Set, Values, Key  
- Added Random: Seed  
- Added Set: Insert  
- Added Stack: Insert, Pop, Push, Top  
- Added all of the above to completions list  

**2011-08-17**  
- Jumps to error now opens the correct file containing the error  

**2011-08-14**  
- Build now jumps to error  
- Neater error reporting on Run  

**2011-08-11**  
- Added jump to error capability  
- Added LANG const  

**2011-08-09**  
- Removed extraneous JOY constants  
- Added missing JoyX/Y/Z keywords  
- Added TARGET const  
- Removed binary integer grammar which was resulting in incorrect display of numerical values  

**2011-08-08**  
- Added else/elseif snippet  
- Reduced number of foldable elements  
- Added keyEquivalent ^⌥⇧+M to activate bundle  
- Renamed bundle from monkey to Monkey  
- Removed preprocessor grammar  
- Removed framework grammar  
- Removed module grammar  
- Added better if/then/elseif/else/endif handling  
- Added bitwise complement operator  
- Removed superstrict reference  
- Tidied block comment grammar  
- Replaced instances of (?:(?:^|;)\s*) with neater \b (regexp boundary)  
- Removed references to integer number symbol %  
- Corrected PI constants regexp  
- Removed pointerops grammar  
- Removed unused types from types grammar  
  
**2011-06-28**  
- Added support for ⌥⎋ (Option+Escape) auto-completion menu  

**2011-05-31**  
- Added support for Discard method (v40)  

**2011-05-19**  
- General cleaning up of scope endings for better syntax colouring  
- Added support for Compare keyword  

**2011-03-31**  
- Added Const and Local snippets and scope  
- Changed Global snippet  
- Scope changes to allow for better syntax highlighting of variable names and more  
- Tweaked Commands regex in language definition  
- Removed Block comment, now uses default TextMate behaviour  
- Added Backwards to completions  

**2011-03-16**  
- Added folding capability for #Rem...#End  
- Reworked block code commenting: ⌘/ uses ' and ⌘? (⇧⌘/) uses #Rem...#End  

**2011-03-15**  
- Fixed missing variable declaration in template app  
- Added references to ⌘R and F13 in readme  
- Update & Run (⌘R) now outputs build status to tool tip  

**2011-03-14**  
- Added OnSuspend/OnResume to template app  
- Small tweaks to tab order in some snippets  

**2011-03-08**  
- Added support for Clamp command  
- Tweak to build window output  

**2011-03-03**  
- Fixed buildopts so that they work with CRLF/Windows line endings  
- Added Update & Run option, bound to Cmd+R  
- Renamed menu to 'Build as ios'  
- Added clean buildopt  
- Added update buildopt  
- Rearranged menu  

**2011-03-01**  
- Initial public release

Commit message:

added editor section and github issues note

README.md, after:

monkey.tmbundle
===============

This bundle lets you to use the Mac OS X editors [TextMate](http://macromates.com) or [Textastic](http://www.textasticapp.com), as well as Windows editor [E Text Editor](http://www.e-texteditor.com), as an IDE for the [monkey programming language](http://www.monkeycoder.co.nz). It is based in part on the existing [blitzmax.bundle](https://github.com/nilium/blitzmax.tmbundle) so thanks to Nilium for that.

Created by Matt Sephton, [http://www.gingerbeardman.com/monkey/](http://www.gingerbeardman.com/monkey/)

## Download

https://github.com/gingerbeardman/monkey.tmbundle/archive/master.zip

## Features

**Syntax Highlighting**  
Easily see keywords, constants, strings, comments, numbers and functions/classes/methods in your code

**Auto Completion of Keywords**  
Press the Escape key to cycle through all matches after typing part of a keyword, Shift+Escape will take cycle backwards, Option+Escape will present a list of matches for you to choose from

**Expand Keywords into Code**  
Press the Tab key to expand one keyword into one or more lines of code, subsequent presses of tab intelligently jump you through the resulting code allowing you to fill in multiple parameters with minimal key strokes

**Build options**  
Specify target, config and run options in the source - no need for the command line

**Build/Run hotkeys**  
Quick and easy full build by pressing ⌘B, or a quicker update and run using ⌘R

**Jump to Error**  
Automatically jump to error after update and run, or with a click after full build

**Context Sensitive Help**  
View the monkey module docs in a popup window by pressing F13

**Quick Start Template**  
One click skeleton template to get you started, build to see instant results

**Easy Source Navigation**  
Navigate around your source using the index of functions, classes and methods

**Bundle Update Check**  
Easily see if you're using the most recent version of the bundle

**Code Folding**, **Configurable Shortcut Keys**  
...and more!

## Editors

All the above features are supported in TextMate 1.5 out of the box.

Support in other editors will vary. See a comparison table here: http://www.gingerbeardman.com/monkey/

Please ask the developer of your chosen editor about improving TextMate bundle support to enable any features you are missing.

## Installation

* Unzip download if it has not been automatically unzipped.

* Rename folder `monkey.tmbundle-master` to `monkey.tmbundle`.

* Double click, or manually move the bundle to:

	TextMate 2:  
	`/Users/username/Library/Application Support/Avian/Bundles/monkey.tmbundle`

	TextMate 1.5:  
	`/Users/username/Library/Application Support/TextMate/Bundles/monkey.tmbundle`

## Usage

### Setup

Before you can use the _monkey_ bundle, you must first set the `TM_MONKEY` shell variable.

To do this, open TextMate's preferences (⌘,) and navigate to the _Advanced_ pane.  Select the _Shell Variables_ tab and add the `TM_MONKEY` variable, where its value is the location of your _monkey_ installation.  For example, "/Developer/Applications/monkey".  Do not include a trailing slash in the path.

This variable allows you to build your applications (⌘B). Documentation and trans lookups are relative to this location.

### Using Projects

When using projects, you can set the `TM_MONKEY_MAIN_FILE` shell variable for your project and specify the main _monkey_ file to build when you use the Build App (⌘B) command.

To set this variable, open the project drawer and deselect any files, then click the "i" button at the bottom of the drawer to open the project info.  Add the `TM_MONKEY_MAIN_FILE` variable, and set its value to the file relative to the main file project's directory.

### Build Options

When using the Build App and Run App commands, your main source file (either the file you have open or the one specified by `TM_MONKEY_MAIN_FILE`) is quickly scanned for a set of build options to determine how to build and/or run the results.  These build options are available under the Build Options snippets, and are as follows:

- **Release & Debug** - `debug`, `release`  
Specifies whether or not to compile the program in debug mode.
- **Target** - `Html5_Game`, `Flash_Game`, `Xna_Game`, `Android_Game`, `iOS_Game`, `Glfw_Game`, `C++_Tool`  
Specifies what type of target to produce. Only targets that are installed correctly on your machine will be available.
- **Run After Build** - `run`  
Executes the resulting output immediately after building it.

Build options are formatted as comments inside your source code and do not have any meaning outside of this bundle.  They are written as:

   `' buildopt: option`

where 'option' is the option you're enabling for the Build and Run commands.  The comments must be on their own lines with only whitespace preceding  them.

## Windows

Use of the bundle under Windows using the [E Text Editor](http://www.e-texteditor.com/) is possible. I'll happily include any hints and tips here if you have them. Otherwise, please consult the [E forum](http://www.e-texteditor.com/forum/viewforum.php?f=6).

## Support
You can talk about the bundle on the [official monkey forum](http://www.monkeycoder.co.nz/Community/posts.php?topic=69).

Please file any pull requests, or issues on [github](https://github.com/gingerbeardman/monkey.tmbundle/issues).

## Requirements
- TextMate [http://macromates.com](http://macromates.com)
- monkey [http://www.monkeycoder.co.nz](http://www.monkeycoder.co.nz)

## License
monkey.tmbundle is made available under a [Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0).

## Changelog

**2013-05-20**  
- Corrected version checking (issue 3)  
- Moved Drawpoint to Declarations (issue 4)  
- Renamed and relinked "download bundle" menu item  
The following are courtesy of https://github.com/tluyben:  
- Updated Build & Run and relevant snippets to v70  
- Documentation target update (issue 5)  
- Fixed the doc viewer and reworked the build option snippets so they work with the new targets  

**2012-05-04**  
- Added Set, FloatSet, IntSet, StringSet (v54c)  
- Added DrawPoint (v50)
- Improved DrawPoly support  
- Included Shinkiro1's new View Documentation for current keyword (v53 and newer)  
- Added new View Documentation (v53 and newer)  

**2011-10-20**  
- Fixed the Update & Run (⌘R) command. Now displays tooltip rather than opening a blank document  
- Renamed bundle update menu items for clarity  

**2011-10-08**  
- Added "Check for bundle update" and  "Open bundle page on github" commands  
- Added FirstNode, LastNode, NextNode, PrevNode, Exp (v45c)  
- Added DisableKeyboard, EnableKeyboard (v45)  
- Added ACosr, ASinr, ATan2r, ATanr, Cosr, Sinr, Tanr (v44)  
- Added DrawPoly (v43)  
- Added App: UpdateRate  
- Added Audio: music commands (v35), Discard  
- Added Graphics: DeviceHeight, DeviceWidth, Frames, HandleX, HandleY, Height, Width  
- Added Lang: Print, Length, Resize, Compare, ToLower, ToUpper, Trim  
- Added List: Backwards, Clear, Count, First, IsEmpty, Last, LastNode, ObjectEnumerator, RemoveFirst, RemoveLast, Value, ToArray  
- Added Map: Set, Values, Key  
- Added Random: Seed  
- Added Set: Insert  
- Added Stack: Insert, Pop, Push, Top  
- Added all of the above to completions list  

**2011-08-17**  
- Jumps to error now opens the correct file containing the error  

**2011-08-14**  
- Build now jumps to error  
- Neater error reporting on Run  

**2011-08-11**  
- Added jump to error capability  
- Added LANG const  

**2011-08-09**  
- Removed extraneous JOY constants  
- Added missing JoyX/Y/Z keywords  
- Added TARGET const  
- Removed binary integer grammar which was resulting in incorrect display of numerical values  

**2011-08-08**  
- Added else/elseif snippet  
- Reduced number of foldable elements  
- Added keyEquivalent ^⌥⇧+M to activate bundle  
- Renamed bundle from monkey to Monkey  
- Removed preprocessor grammar  
- Removed framework grammar  
- Removed module grammar  
- Added better if/then/elseif/else/endif handling  
- Added bitwise complement operator  
- Removed superstrict reference  
- Tidied block comment grammar  
- Replaced instances of (?:(?:^|;)\s*) with neater \b (regexp boundary)  
- Removed references to integer number symbol %  
- Corrected PI constants regexp  
- Removed pointerops grammar  
- Removed unused types from types grammar  
  
**2011-06-28**  
- Added support for ⌥⎋ (Option+Escape) auto-completion menu  

**2011-05-31**  
- Added support for Discard method (v40)  

**2011-05-19**  
- General cleaning up of scope endings for better syntax colouring  
- Added support for Compare keyword  

**2011-03-31**  
- Added Const and Local snippets and scope  
- Changed Global snippet  
- Scope changes to allow for better syntax highlighting of variable names and more  
- Tweaked Commands regex in language definition  
- Removed Block comment, now uses default TextMate behaviour  
- Added Backwards to completions  

**2011-03-16**  
- Added folding capability for #Rem...#End  
- Reworked block code commenting: ⌘/ uses ' and ⌘? (⇧⌘/) uses #Rem...#End  

**2011-03-15**  
- Fixed missing variable declaration in template app  
- Added references to ⌘R and F13 in readme  
- Update & Run (⌘R) now outputs build status to tool tip  

**2011-03-14**  
- Added OnSuspend/OnResume to template app  
- Small tweaks to tab order in some snippets  

**2011-03-08**  
- Added support for Clamp command  
- Tweak to build window output  

**2011-03-03**  
- Fixed buildopts so that they work with CRLF/Windows line endings  
- Added Update & Run option, bound to Cmd+R  
- Renamed menu to 'Build as ios'  
- Added clean buildopt  
- Added update buildopt  
- Rearranged menu  

**2011-03-01**  
- Initial public release
